FACTORS CAUSING FLOOD
1)	RAINFALL
The most common cause of flooding is rainfall. Flooding occurs in known floodplains when prolonged rainfall occurs over several days or when intense rainfall occurs over a relatively short period of time. Severe thunderstorms are often the causes of heavy rainfall which lead to flood-like situations. So, rainfall would be one of the key factors in predicting floods. While considering rainfall as a factor, we could well determine the situation from the magnitude of rainfall in the region of consideration.

2)	CATCHMENT AREA
Along with rainfall, the terrain and water-absorbing capacity of the catchment area is also an essential factor to be taken into consideration. The soil in the catchment area should be of high water-holding capacity. Soil water holding capacity is controlled primarily by the soil texture and the soil organic matter content. Soil texture is a reflection of the particle size distribution of a soil. In general, the higher the percentage of silt and clay sized particles, the higher the water holding capacity. Moreover, the terrain in and around the catchment area also plays an important role in determining the extent of rainfall in the area. Generally, the regions of hilly terrains are the areas which receive more rainfall in comparison to the plain ones. This is because the hilly regions block the clouds from further flowing and as a result, a high percentage of rainfall occurs at the hills and their slopes. This water then flows to the foothills of the terrains which generates a possibility of flood like condition in the region.

3)	WATER BASIN LEVELS
The level or capacity of the river also is a major factor. Due to human interference in the flowing of rivers such as building of dams, decrease in river width due to massive constructions and filling of river bed in order to acquire more and more land, etc., the stress on river beds increases as a lower volume or space is available for the rivers to drain the extra volume of water.

4)	RESERVOIRS
Reservoirs are artificially created lakes that are usually formed by building a dam, across a river. Recent floods like the floods in Kerala imply that the failure of reservoirs also have a great hand in causing flash flooding in the regions that follow the reservoir. The weakening of dams and over-filling of the reservoirs can result in either breaking of the dam or overflow of extra water into the adjoining land area. Many dams are built for the purpose of flood protection, to attenuate flow and its impacts downstream. The inflow and outflow of water from a reservoir are determined by an operating schedule or rule curve, which maintains a flood cushion in expectation of inflows expected to fill the reservoir. Rule curve revision may be required periodically, but changing weather patterns is rarely the reason for it. More often, rule curve revision is required due to changed priorities and reduced carrying capacity of the downstream channel.

5)	STORM SURGE
In many cases, due to the development of deep depressions or low pressure regions, the sea breeze or the wind from the high pressure area of seas rushes towards the low pressure regions and brings moist air which later forms clouds and precipitates causing heavy rainfall across the low pressure region. This rainfall generally has much greater magnitude in comparison to normal rainfall. Such heavy rainfall can also end up in flood like situations if the catchment area would be unable to absorb the amount the water that would precipitate.
